
This document describes the design of KDevelop's debugger part. Not that it's
work in progress, and sometimes describes desired design, not the actual
one.

== Components and lifecycle ==

Debugger part consists of low-lever "controller" that handles talking
with gdb and guess what state gdb is in, a number of view widgets, showing
the state of the program, and a number of places where user can click to
affect the program.

What makes them all work together are "events" that controller sends
to all interested parties. They are:

   - Debugger exited. All view classes and actions become disabled and hidden
   - Program exited. All view classes that can't be used without program
       become disabled.
   - Debugger is busy executing a command. All actions become disabled.
   - Debugger is waiting for command. All actions becomes enabled.
   - Program state changed. All views flush all cached data and 
       reload the content.
   - Current thread/stack frame changed. All views switch to showing that
     thread/frame.

The distinction between "program state change" and "thread/frame" changed is
that the latter does not imply that any *data* changed, and so it's not
necessary to clear already cached data for other threads. 

== Command execution ==

The controller has a queue of commands to send to gdb. A command typically
has a callback (pair of QObject* and a member pointer) to be called when 
command is done. 

When the queue is non-empty, and debugger is not busy executing the previous
command, the controller will send the command from the queue top to the gdb.
The command being executed is remembed in the currentCmd_ member variable.
Gdb will reply with a number of "out-of-band" responses, followed by one
"done" or "error" response. 

The "done"/"error" response, when using MI interface, is a tree-line structure
that's parsed with into GDBMI::ResultRecord structure, that is then passed
to callback assocaited with the current command. Say, for "get me value of
expression" command, MI response includes textual "value" field that can be
used by any part of GUI to show the value. After callback is called,
controller deletes the current command and then tries to execute next one from
the queue, if there's one.

The commands related to running program (continue/step/etc) are handled in
a bit special way. Instead of calling any callbacks, controller performs
predefined set of steps:

   - Decide what's the reason for stop, and maybe do something special

        - For stop on shared lib load, just continue

        - For stop on breakpoint, run the breakpoint commands if any.

   - Set a flag that program state might have changed, and must be reloaded

   - Since hitting tracepoint adds extra commands, including possibly
     "continue", we don't start reloading widgets immediately, instead
     we wait for all commands currently in queue to get executed.

   - Once there are no commands in queue, and "reload_program_state" flag is
     set, we raise the 'program_state_changed' event. All widgets react to
     that by queueing commands for realoding their state.

     











Note that all commands are executed in the order they were queued, so if you
add several commands at the same time, they are executed "automically". Each
one sees the gdb state that the previous one has left it in.

The MI protocol is stateful, that is there are things like current thread
and current stack that affect the meaning of commands. Take care to never
switch such "current" variables unless it's explicitly asked by the user.
This means that if you have to switch thread/frame, always switch it back
as the last command in a sequences.


== Breakpoints handling ==

Whenever a new breakpoint is added, or an existing breakpoint is modified,
we immediately try to send the proper commands to gdb. Note that we
don't try to check which properties of breakpoint were modified, we 
just send all breakpoint data.

This is not always possible, because debugger might be busy, or just
not started yet. In this case, we set 'pending' flag for breakpoint. Each time
the debugger becomes free, we try to send the pending breakpoint again.











